chore(blog): announcing AsyncAPI & Spectral collaboration (#663)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/creating-consistency-announcing-asyncapi-spectral-together.md

---

> title: "Creating Consistency: Announcing AsyncAPI & Spectral – Together!"

Reviewer: Spectral for me is always about governance and lining. I think having both or at least one word in the title is better than `consistency` but yeah, personal opinion 

I do not have a clear suggestion how to do it though, sorry 😞  your call

Reviewer 2: How about Creating Good Governance: Announcing AsyncAPI & Spectral – Together!

Author: How about one of these?

- Governance for Asynchronous APIs: Announcing AsyncAPI & Spectral – Together!
- Creating Good Governance: Announcing AsyncAPI & Spectral – Together

Reviewer: any of these is good as long as `governance` is mentioned 😄 up to you 😄

date: 2022-04-13T6:20:59+02:00
type: Community
tags: 
  - API Governance 
cover: /img/posts/creating-consistency-announcing-asyncapi-spectral-together/cover.webp
authors:

>   - name: Stoplight

Reviewer: We definitely allow only humans contributions 😄  @P0lip please provide your name, avatar and the rest 🙏🏼

Consistency is a top concern for companies across the globe.

At Stoplight, we’re seeking to help your organization achieve consistency. We believe that API descriptions should be
treated the same way as code. APIs should have style guides with rules, and be reviewed to ensure they are descriptive,
readable, and concise for the developers who use them. Developer experience is, after all, another top concern for
companies.

So, we created our open-source JSON linting tool Spectral. It promotes standards with the flexibility for custom rule
creation to validate and lint any JSON.

For example, while an AsyncAPI or OpenAPI document might be entirely valid, it could be missing important fields like
descriptions for parameters or have other problematic design issues. Spectral can warn about possible improvements to
ensure API definitions can reach their full potential, without needing to have special code owners review every change
to the documents.

Although Spectral is mostly referenced in the context of OpenAPI, AsyncAPI has been an integral

> part of Spectral for quite some time now. In fact, later this month our Spectral AsyncAPI ruleset will celebrate its

Reviewer: sorry, but yeah, you will have to adjust this one from `later this month` to `last month`

second anniversary.

## Why AsyncAPI?

While OpenAPI remains one of the top specifications, AsyncAPI is growing. And each has their own [unique benefits and
challenges](https://www.asyncapi.com/blog/openapi-vs-asyncapi-burning-questions). The ability to have options gives Spectral users more flexibility for their APIs.

Spectral had primarily been an OpenAPI linter that was simply capable of working with other JSON documents. Now, by
enabling AsyncAPI rulesets, organizations can achieve the consistency they’re looking for with more flexibility.

## Introducing AsyncAPI & Spectral - Together!

The release of [AsyncAPI ruleset](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjUzNDg-async-api-rules) was more than just another feature added; it was considered a milestone. Previously,
Spectral lacked meaningful rulesets for other formats, and the number of learning resources was somewhat limited, making
the adaption of Spectral outside of OpenAPI rather minimal.

> Our collaboration with AsyncAPI means that we’ve given the appropriate AsyncAPI maintainers write access to the Spectral

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our collaboration with AsyncAPI means that we’ve given the respective AsyncAPI maintainers write access to the Spectral
```

should it be like this? @alequetzalli ?

also please specify, to make it clear, that we do not make some secret selections, that you basically gave this access to folks that maintain JavaScript Parser from AsyncAPI

With the release of [Spectral 6](https://blog.stoplight.io/api-linting-with-spectral-keeps-getting-better), that transition period wrapped up and Spectral is now more flexible than it’s ever been.

## Steps to Utilizing AsyncAPI & Spectral

Linting AsyncAPI documents is quite similar to linting OpenAPI documents, meaning
most of the information about Spectral you’ll find on the internet will apply to AsyncAPI. Together with AsyncAPI
initiative, we [maintain a Spectral ruleset](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjUzNDg-async-api-rules) containing a number of useful rules you can leverage in your workflow to help
you get started.

**Step One:**

To get started, you need to [install Spectral first](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/docs/getting-started/2-installation.md). Note that you need to have [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm) or
[Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/getting-started/install) installed, running `npm install -g @stoplight/spectral-cli` or `yarn global add @stoplight/spectral-cli` is sufficient
to get Spectral.

> Since we intend to use the AsyncAPI ruleset, we can also consider installing `@stoplight/spectral-rulesets`, which

Reviewer: I have to say this was confusing to me that `@stoplight/spectral-rulesets` can be installed, as in the end it is included in cli.

maybe better change this paragraph to say that "CLI includes @stoplight/spectral-rulesets package containing AsyncAPI and other rulesets" ? Link to GitHub repo would be awesome, so people know where to find sources. Actually `@stoplight/spectral-rulesets` could be a link that points to github

Author: Sounds good, I'll apply that change.

Reviewer 2: that works

---
title: "Creating Consistency: Announcing AsyncAPI & Spectral – Together!"

> date: 2022-04-13T6:20:59+02:00

Reviewer: since there are just some final editorial changes needed @P0lip then when you do them, also set the date when you want to get it publish. Publish date is up to you, you can even tell me what hour you want to release it exactly

Reviewer 2: @P0lip will update those changes and we'll aim to publish Wednesday morning!

type: Community
tags: 
  - API Governance 
cover: /img/posts/creating-consistency-announcing-asyncapi-spectral-together/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Stoplight
    photo: /img/avatars/stoplight.webp
    link: https://stoplight.io/
    byline: We build API tooling
excerpt: | 

>   The collaboration between Stoplight’s open-source linting tool, Spectral, and AsyncAPI is going to be a game changer for creating more consistency in your API program. Check out what comes with the release of the AsyncAPI ruleset!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The collaboration between Stoplight’s open-source linting tool, Spectral, and AsyncAPI will be a game-changer for creating more consistency in your API program. Check out what comes with the release of the AsyncAPI ruleset!
```

---

> # Creating Consistency: Announcing AsyncAPI & Spectral – Together!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Remove this heading, the title is getting injected automatically: https://deploy-preview-663--asyncapi-website.netlify.app/blog/creating-consistency-announcing-asyncapi-spectral-together.

The collaboration between Stoplight’s open-source linting tool, Spectral, and AsyncAPI is going to be a game changer for creating more consistency in your API program. Check out what comes with the release of the AsyncAPI ruleset!

Consistency is a top concern for companies across the globe.

At Stoplight, we’re seeking to help your organization achieve consistency. We believe that API descriptions should be
treated the same way as code. APIs should have style guides with rules, and be reviewed to ensure they are descriptive,
readable, and concise for the developers who use them. Developer experience is, after all, another top concern for
companies.

So, we created our open-source JSON linting tool Spectral. It promotes standards with the flexibility for custom rule
creation to validate and lint any JSON.

For example, while an AsyncAPI or OpenAPI document might be entirely valid, it could be missing important fields like
descriptions for parameters or have other problematic design issues. Spectral can warn about possible improvements to
ensure API definitions can reach their full potential, without needing to have special code owners review every change
to the documents.

> Although Spectral is mostly referenced in the context of OpenAPI, AsyncAPI (funded by Postman), has been an integral

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although Spectral is mostly referenced in the context of OpenAPI, AsyncAPI has been an integral
```

I don't think we need to say it that way because it could sound as if we only have 1 org/company that has donated to the OSS AsyncAPI Initiative. 🤔   What do you think @derberg?

Author: Fair enough, removed :)

enabling AsyncAPI rulesets, organizations can achieve the consistency they’re looking for with more flexibility.

## Introducing AsyncAPI & Spectral - Together!

The release of [AsyncAPI ruleset](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjUzNDg-async-api-rules) was more than just another feature added; it was considered a milestone. Previously,
Spectral lacked meaningful rulesets for other formats, and the number of learning resources was somewhat limited, making
the adaption of Spectral outside of OpenAPI rather minimal.

Our collaboration with AsyncAPI means that we’ve given the appropriate AsyncAPI maintainers write access to the Spectral
repo AsyncAPI rulesets, though here at Stoplight we will still continue to operate with PRs, and ensure these get
priority.

### The Game Changer

The introduction of support for another major API definition helped us further assess its level of importance as well as
initiated a notable shift in the way we perceived Spectral internally. Treating AsyncAPI ruleset as a first-class
citizen pushed us to entirely decouple our codebase from OpenAPI. The core purpose of Spectral (linting API definitions)

> remained unchanged and still holds the truth, but from an engineering standpoint, it meant a shift in focus to the other

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
remained unchanged and still holds true, but from an engineering standpoint, it meant a shift in focus to the other
```

specs and a renewed attention on writing code that can be applicable everywhere.

Back in 2018 or 2019, plenty of code was oriented around OpenAPI, tests, and naming. All were focused solely on OpenAPI,
meaning rulesets themselves couldn’t be applied easily to other formats (Spectral didn’t support them previously).

With the release of [Spectral 6](https://blog.stoplight.io/api-linting-with-spectral-keeps-getting-better), that transition period wrapped up and Spectral is now more flexible than it’s ever been.

## Steps to Utilizing AsyncAPI & Spectral

Linting AsyncAPI documents is quite similar to linting OpenAPI documents, meaning
most of the information about Spectral you’ll find on the internet will apply to AsyncAPI. Together with AsyncAPI
initiative, we [maintain a Spectral ruleset](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjUzNDg-async-api-rules) containing a number of useful rules you can leverage in your workflow to help
you get started.

**Step One:**

> To get started, you need to install Spectral first, which can be done [here](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/docs/getting-started/2-installation.md). Note that you need to have [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm) or

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To get started, you need to [install Spectral first](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/docs/getting-started/2-installation.md). Note that you need to have [npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm) or
```

Same **Accessibility** feedback as added in **Step 3**:
https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/663/files#r849819370

[Yarn](https://yarnpkg.com/getting-started/install) installed, running `npm install -g @stoplight/spectral-cli` or `yarn global add @stoplight/spectral-cli` is sufficient
to get Spectral.

> Since we intend to use the AsyncAPI ruleset, we can also consider installing @stoplight/spectral-rulesets, which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since we intend to use the AsyncAPI ruleset, we can also consider installing `@stoplight/spectral-rulesets`, which
```

> contains the actual ruleset we’ll use. However, it’s an optional step, as the installation of spectral-cli will already
> install spectral-rulesets for you.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
contains the actual ruleset we’ll use. However, it’s an optional step, as the installation of `spectral-cli` will already
install `spectral-rulesets` for you.
```

**Step Two:**

Once you’ve got all the required dependencies installed, you can start by creating a simple ruleset. To do so,
create a file called `.spectral.json`. The following template can be used as a decent baseline:

```json
{

>   // this makes sure our rules apply only to AsyncAPI documents. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // This makes sure our rules apply only to AsyncAPI documents. 
```

  // It might be handy in case you have other specs in the directory you intend to lint.
  "formats": ["asyncapi2"],
  // this includes the ruleset linked below
  // https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjUzNDg-async-api-rules

>   // Note, that by default only recommended rules are enabled. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // Note that by default, only recommended rules are enabled. 
```

  // Some rules listed in the article above may not be a fit for you,
  // therefore we don’t enable them by default.
  "extends": "spectral:asyncapi",
  "rules": {
    // we can add our own rules here
  }
}
```

**Step Three:**

To better facilitate the actual demands, Spectral allows you to create your own rules. These rules will fill the gaps

> and cover use cases unique to your workflow, style guide. While a more thorough reference regarding custom rules is
> available [here](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjI1MTg5-custom-rulesets#adding-rules), a basic rule could look as follows. The rule we’re about to implement will assert the presence and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and cover use cases unique to your workflow, and style guide. While a more thorough [reference regarding custom rules is available here](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjI1MTg5-custom-rulesets#adding-rules), a basic rule could look as follows. The rule we’re about to implement will assert the presence and
```
## Ambiguous or incomplete anchor text  
A link is incomplete and/or ambiguous if a user has to read the surrounding copy around the link to get an idea of where it could take them. 

**Example:**
`<a href="url">here</a>`

### WCAG 2.1 success criteria for anchor text: 

> “The [purpose of each link](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#dfn-purpose-of-each-link) can be determined from the link text alone or the link text together with its [programmatically determined link context](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#dfn-programmatically-determined-link-context), except where the purpose of the link would be [ambiguous to users in general](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#dfn-ambiguous-to-users-in-general).”

Think about how an HTML button that only says “here” isn’t informative in isolation; a user reliant on a screenreader is forced to read the surrounding copy and headings to figure out where the link will take you.

> correctness of the version inside of Info object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
correctness of the version inside of the `Info` object.
```

```json
{
  "message": "Version must match 1.x.x",
  // one can also define description property here, 
  // which is supposed to be a markdown string
  // containing a more detailed explanation about the rule
  "severity": "error", // or warn, or info, or hint
  // any JSONPath-compliant expression
  // https://goessner.net/articles/JsonPath/
  "given": "$.info",
  "then": [
    {
      "field": "version",
      "function": "defined"
    },
    {
      "field": "version",
      "function": "pattern",
      "functionOptions": {
        "match": "^1(\\.[0-9]+){2}$"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

**Step four:**

> Now that we have a basic rule, we can insert it into the ruleset we previously created

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that we have a basic rule, we can insert it into the ruleset we previously created:
```

```json
{
  "formats": [
    "asyncapi2"
  ],
  "extends": "spectral:asyncapi",
  "rules": {
    "valid-document-version": {
      "message": "Version must match 1.x.x",
      "severity": "error",
      "given": "$.info",
      "then": [
        {
          "field": "version",
          "function": "defined"
        },
        {
          "field": "version",
          "function": "pattern",
          "functionOptions": {
            "match": "^1(\\.[0-9]+){2}$"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

**Step five:**

> Now that we have all pieces together, we can run Spectral. We’ll take the Hello World example from the AsyncAPI documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that we have all the pieces together, we can run Spectral. We’ll take the [`Hello World` example from the AsyncAPI documentation](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/getting-started/hello-world).
```

```yaml
# hello-world.yaml
asyncapi: 2.2.0
info:
  title: Hello world application
  version: '0.1.0'
channels:
  hello:
    publish:
      message:
        payload:
          type: string
          pattern: '^hello .+$'
```

To lint, execute the following command:

`spectral lint hello-world.yaml`

![Spectral Lint Results](/img/posts/creating-consistency-announcing-asyncapi-spectral-together/lint-results.webp)

> Thanks to the built-in AsyncAPI ruleset, we receive more feedback than just the information about invalid document version. The default configuration is usually reasonable for most, but should you want to tweak the version, please visit our [documentation](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjI1MTg5-custom-rulesets#modifying-rules) that explains everything in greater detail.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thanks to the built-in AsyncAPI ruleset, we receive more feedback than just the information about invalid document versions. The default configuration is usually reasonable for most, but should you want to tweak the version, please visit our [documentation](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/ZG9jOjI1MTg5-custom-rulesets#modifying-rules) that explains everything in greater detail.
```
